I'm going to share a little neuroscience tidbit, but I think it's one that you'll appreciate. Most people don't know this, but there's a brain structure called the Anterior Mid-Cingulate Cortex. As we pointed out before, that's a noun, it's a name. It doesn't mean anything. We could call it the Cookie Monster. But what's interesting about this brain area is there are now a lot of data in humans, that's a mouse study, showing that when people do something they don't want to do, like add three hours of exercise per day or per week, or when people who are trying to diet and lose weight resist eating something. When people do anything that they, and this is the important part, that they don't want to do. It's not about adding more work. It's about adding more work that you don't want to do. This brain area gets bigger. Now, here's what's especially interesting about this brain area to me. And by the way, I'm only learning this recently because it's new data. But there's a lot of it. The anterior midsingulate cortex is smaller in obese people. It gets bigger when they diet. It's larger in athletes. It's especially large or grows larger in people that see themselves as challenged and overcome some challenge.
In people that live a very long time, this area keeps its size. In many ways, scientists are starting to think of the anterior midsingulate cortex not just as one of the seats of willpower, but perhaps actually the seat of the will to live.
Now we're talking.
And when I learned about the anterior midsingulate cortex, I was almost out of my seat. And I've been in the neuroscience game since I was 20. We're the same age. And I was so pumped because I've heard of the amygdala fear, prefrontal cortex, it's planning in action. I could tell you every brain area, and I I teach neuroanatomy to medical students. But when I started seeing the data on the anterior midsingulate cortex, I was like, whoa, this is interesting. All the data points to the fact that we can build this area up, but that as quickly as we build it up, if we don't continue to invest in things that are hard for us, that we don't want to do. That's the part that feels so goganesque to me that we don't want to do. If you love the ice bath, yeah, I love the ice bath. You go from 1 minute to 10 minutes. Guess what? Your anterior midsingulate cortex did not grow. None. But if you hate the cold water, if you're afraid of drowning and you get into water and put your head under, and survive, then the anterior midsingulate cortex gets bigger.
But if you don't do it the next day, or if you do it the next day and you enjoy it because, Hey, I did it yesterday. Happy me. Merry Christmas, as you would say. Right. Merry Christmas. Guess what? The anterior midsingulate cortex shrinks again. To me, this is one of the most important discoveries that neuroscience has ever made, because it's that I don't want to do something, but do it anyway. That grows this area, and It's almost like I have a friend, he's been sober 30 years from alcohol, and he always says, The amazing thing about addiction is there's a cure. The problem is it only works one day at a time. You have to renew it every day. The anterior midsingulate cortex To me, when I learned about it, two things went off in my head. Whoa, this is super interesting. And two, I got to tell David Goggins about this. And I waited until now to tell you because I felt like, well, for obvious reasons, I wanted to tell you and I wanted to tell you here.
Well, I love that because that's how I've lived my entire life. I don't know anything about that. But people go, Man, you have such a strong will. It's something that you build. I never forgot, I was on a podcast one time and this dude goes, you were blessed with a strong mind. What the hell are you talking about? I was blessed with a strong mind. That's something that you have to develop. You develop that over Years, decades of suffering and going back into the suffer. That's why a lot of people who graduate Navy SEAL Training, they want to know... I talk about it very openly all the time. A lot of guys don't want to go back into that water, don't want to go back into the hard stuff. It may be not anything hard, anything hard in life. Once you get through it, it's like you become a POW. How many POWs you know want to go back to POW camp? None. When something sucks so bad in life, this is on this that we're talking about now, very few people want to go back. They're happy they graduated. I realized I'm the same way.
I don't want to go back. I have to go back. I must go back. Because that is exactly where all the knowledge of my life exists, was back there in what you're exactly talking about. Well, I didn't know anything about this, but how I grew a will was constantly doing these things to now it's just life. I wake up while it still sucks, it's just life. You don't sit back and like, oh, my God. I have days I don't want to do, but I know I'm going to do it. I know from years of just doing it. So that's beautiful. And this is why I came on here with you today, and I'm glad you're talking about this because human beings need to hear this. They need to stop hearing these hacks on this and that. There's no fucking hack, bro. There's no fucking hack. Yeah, You made this and that and saunas and all this shit. Yeah, it's great. There is no fucking life hack. To grow that thing, how do you grow it? Do it and do it and do it and do it. That's the hack. The hack is going to fucking suck.
And that's what I realized. That's what I realized. That's why I wanted to come on here today. I didn't want to come on here and talk about no fucking passion and purpose and how to get the fuck out of bed and how did it hit a fucking alarm clock and all this catchphrase bullshit because that wasn't how I lived. I wasn't how I lived. I woke up like every human being does and goes, Fuck, man, I'm a fucking piece of shit today. How the hell is It's going to work out for me. And you fight that. And you fight that. You don't overwrite it. It's no override button. It's the conversation in your head. So how do you do that? We don't have enough of these conversations about the A real conversation that every human being is having, and they have no idea how to get out of it, but they do. It's that shit right there, man. You got to build your will. How do you build your will? Exactly what you said, man. Exactly what you said.
Well, I feel like knowing the name of something, anterior midsingulate cortex, doesn't fundamentally change us. But one thing I like about biology is that willpower, if somebody feels they don't have it, it feels like this thing that other people have. But everybody, unless they're brain damaged, a hole through their head, has two anterior midsingulate cortex, one on each side of their brain. Everyone has one. They have two. I feel like it's just a question of opening the portal. The portal, what, again, I'm going to say 10 times and forgive me, is I think people go, Oh, I do hard things. I do sets to failure, and then I do four straps. I love training with weights. I love doing sets to failure. I even like four straps. But guess what? I like four straps. I'll tell you, they don't build my anterior mid-singulate cortex because I like to do it. It's right. Anything you like to do is not going to enhance this aspect of willpower. It seems so obvious once you hear it, you go, Oh, yeah, of course. But I think you really close that loop for people when you share what you're sharing today and what you shared elsewhere before as well, when you're trying to explain the friction is the critical ingredient.
I think people think, Oh, if it's effort, well, then I'm getting better. That's part of it, necessary but not sufficient, as we say in science. But the suck part, the being haunted, the stick, they're really unpleasant terms. Very. These are probably the most unpleasant terms we've ever used on this podcast. Those are the levers. Those are the gears. And without those, this thing that you're talking about, David Goggins, as a verb. I sometimes make the joke, but it's not a joke. Right. Goggins is a name, and it's a verb. People go, I'm going to Goggans that. But that's, I think, again, I'm not a psychologist, but I think that's what you're talking about. The stick, the friction being haunted. It's the suck part that grows this anterior midsingulate cortex.

